IGNITE-13659 Cache encryption key rotation (documentation) (#8446)
apache/ignite: docs/_docs/security/cache-encryption-key-rotation.adoc

// Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
// contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
// this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
// The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
// (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
// the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
// http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.
= Cache encryption key rotation

== Overview

> Cache group encryption key is used to encrypt cache data on disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cache group encryption key is used to encrypt cache data on the disk.
```

> The cache group encryption key is used to encrypt cache data on disk.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> When a new cache starts, a new encryption key is generated and propagated to all server nodes in the cluster. So each node for the same cache group has the same cache encryption key.

Author: Changed to "When a user creates a new encrypted cache"

> When a user creates a new encrypted cache, a new encryption key is generated and propagated to all server nodes in the cluster. So, each node for the same cache group has the same cache encryption key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user creates a new encrypted cache, a new encryption key is generated and propagated to all server nodes in the cluster. So, each node has the same cache encryption key for the same cache group.
```

> To learn more see the link:security/tde[Transparent Data Encryption] page.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> See link:security/tde[Transparent Data Encryption] to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See link:security/tde[Transparent Data Encryption] for more detail.
```

Ignite 2.10 introduces a feature for changing the cache encryption key.

> It allows users to change the cache group encryption key and re-encrypt existing data at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows to change the cache group encryption key and re-encrypt existing data at runtime.
```

> It allows users to change the encryption key of the cache group and re-encrypt existing data at runtime.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> Rotation of the cache encryption key is required if this key has been compromised or if the crypto period (key validity period) has ended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rotation of the cache encryption key is required when the key is compromised or the crypto period (key validity period) is ended.
```

> Rotation of the cache encryption key is required if this key has been compromised or at the end of the crypto period (key validity period).

Author: Fixed, thanks.

The process of changing the cache encryption key includes two sequential stages:

> 1. Rotate cache group key. This process adds a new encryption key for the specified cache group(s) on each server node and sets it to write new data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Rotate cache group key. This process adds a new encryption key for the specified cache group or groups on each server node and sets it to write new data.
```

    Node join during this stage is prohibited and will be rejected.

2. Re-encrypt existing (archived) cache data with the new encryption key.

> The second stage can take a long time. It depends on the amount of existing data. During this period the old key will be kept to read the archived data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second stage can take a while. It depends on the amount of existing data. During this period, the old key is kept to read the archived data.
```

> To understand what key the data is encrypted with, each encryption key has an _identifier_. By default it is equal to zero. The identifier of the new key increases with each rotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand what key the data is encrypted with, each encryption key has an _identifier_. By default, it is equal to zero. The identifier value of the new key increases with each new rotation.
```

The encryption key (as well as encryption key ID) is the same for all nodes in a cache group.

NOTE: Secondary rotation of the cache encryption key is possible only after a complete change of the encryption key for a cache group (both stages).

== Prerequisites

The cluster should be active.

> == Changing the encryption key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Changing the Encryption Key
```

Ignite provides the ability to change the cache encryption key using the following interfaces:

- link:#command-line-tool[command line tool]
- link:#jmx[JMX]
- link:#from-code[from code]

> === Command line tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Command Line Tool
```

Ignite shipment includes `control.sh|bat` script, located in the `$IGNITE_HOME/bin` folder, that acts as a tool to manage the
cache encryption key change process from the command line. The following commands are used with `control.sh|bat`:

[source,shell]
----
# View the cache group encryption key identifiers.
control.sh|bat --encryption cache_key_ids cacheGroupName

# Change the cache encryption key.
control.sh|bat --encryption change_cache_key cacheGroupName
----

=== JMX

You can also change the cache encryption key via the `EncryptionMXBean` interface:

[cols="1,1",opts="header"]
|===
|Method | Description
|changeCacheGroupKey(String cacheOrGrpName) | Starts cache encryption key change process.
|===

> === From code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== From Code
```

> The cache encryption key change process can also be managed programmatically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cache encryption key change process can also be managed directly in the code:
```

[tabs]
--
tab:Java[]

[source, java]
----
include::{javaCodeDir}/TDE.java[tags=cache-group-key-rotation, indent=0]
----
--

> == Managing re-encryption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Managing Re-encryption
```

> Re-encrypting existing data can take a long time. This is a fault-tolerant operation that automatically continues after a node restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Re-encrypting existing data can take a while. This is a fault-tolerant operation that automatically continues after a node restart.
```

The previous encryption key is automatically removed when all local partitions are encrypted with the new key, and the last link:persistence/native-persistence#write-ahead-log[Write-Ahead Log] segment, which may contain entries encrypted with the previous key, is removed from disk.

NOTE: Re-encryption uses link:persistence/native-persistence#write-ahead-log[Write-Ahead Log] for physical recovery and may affect performance of cache operations.

There are several options to manage the performance impact of re-encryption:

* Limit the re-encryption rate using a configuration parameter or CLI at runtime.
* Temporarily suspend re-encryption using CLI command.

> Ignite 2.10 introduces a new configuration section `EncryptionConfiguration`, that is part of `DatastorageConfiguration`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ignite 2.10 introduces a new configuration section `EncryptionConfiguration`, that is a part of `DatastorageConfiguration`.
```

[cols="1,1,1",opts="header"]
|===
|Property | Default value | Description
|reencryptionRateLimit | 0 (unlimited) | Re-encryption rate limit in megabytes per second.
|reencryptionBatchSize | 100 | The number of pages scanned during re-encryption under checkpoint lock.
|===

> === Using XML configuration to limit the re-encryption rate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Using XML Configuration to Limit the Re-encryption Rate
```

[source, xml]
----
include::code-snippets/xml/tde.xml[tags=ignite-config;!discovery;!encryption;!cache;!discovery, indent=0]
----

> === Using CLI to control re-encryption process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Using CLI to Control Re-encryption Process
```

> === Using CLI to control re-encryption

Author: Changed to "Using CLI to control re-encryption process"

> The `control.sh|bat` script provides the ability to change the re-encryption rate, suspend and resume background re-encryption at runtime.

Reviewer 2: '...as well as suspend...'

> NOTE: After the node restarts, the suspended background re-encryption will be continued automatically, and the rate limit will be set to 'unlimited' (by default), or taken from the local XML configuration (if any).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: After the node restarts, the suspended background re-encryption is continued automatically, and the rate limit is set to 'unlimited' (by default), or taken from the local XML configuration (if any).
```

> NOTE: After the node restarts, the suspended background re-encryption will continue automatically, and the rate limit will be set from the local XML configuration (if any) or set to unlimited rate (default).

Reviewer 2: '...re-encryption will continue automatically' --> '...re-encryption will be continued automatically'
'...and the rate limit will be set to 'unlimited' (by default), or taken from the local XML configuration (if any).'

[source,shell]
----

> # View the re-encryption status of the cache group.

Reviewer 2: 'View the cache group re-encryption status.'

control.sh|bat --encryption reencryption_status cacheGroupName

# Suspend re-encryption of the cache group.
control.sh|bat --encryption suspend_reencryption cacheGroupName

# Resume (suspended) re-encryption of the cache group.
control.sh|bat --encryption resume_reencryption cacheGroupName

# View the re-encryption rate limit.
control.sh|bat --encryption reencryption_rate_limit

# Set the re-encryption rate limit to 2.5 MB/s.
control.sh|bat --encryption reencryption_rate_limit 2.5

> # Set re-encryption to an unlimited rate.

Reviewer 2: 'Set re-encryption rate to 'unlimited' ('0').'

control.sh|bat --encryption reencryption_rate_limit 0
----

> The re-encryption status can also be obtained using JMX metrics described in the link:monitoring-metrics/new-metrics#cache-groups[Cache group metrics] section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The re-encryption status can be also obtained using JMX metrics described in the link:monitoring-metrics/new-metrics#cache-groups[Cache group metrics] section.
```

> The re-encryption status can also be obtained using JMX metrics, which are described in the link:monitoring-metrics/new-metrics#cache-groups[Cache group metrics] section.

Reviewer 2: '...using JMX metrics described in the link:monitoring-metrics/new-metrics#cache-groups[Cache group metrics] section.'
